Software engineers apply engineering principles
 and knowledge of programming languages to 
 build software solutions for end users.



 Key milestones:
 1968: The first NATO Software Engineering Conference is held.
 1970s: A number of new methodologies are developed, including structured programming and object-oriented programming.
 1980s: The first computer-aided software engineering (CASE) tools are released.



 List and briefly explain the phases of the Software Development Life Cycle.
 1. Planning & Analysis
The first phase of the SDLC is the project planning stage where you are gathering business requirements from your client or stakeholders. This phase is when you evaluate the feasibility of creating the product, revenue potential, the cost of production, the needs of the end-users, etc.

To properly decide what to make, what not to make, and what to make first, you can use a feature prioritization framework that takes into account the value of the software/update, the cost, the time it takes to build, and other factors.

Once it is decided that the software project is in line with business and stakeholder goals, feasible to create, and addresses user needs, then you can move on to the next phase.

2. Define Requirements
This phase is critical for converting the information gathered 
during the planning and analysis phase into clear requirements for the development team. This process guides the development of several important documents: a software requirement specification (SRS) or product specification,
 a Use Case document, and a Requirement Traceability Matrix document.
 3. Design
The design phase is where you put pen to paper—so to speak. The original plan and vision are elaborated into a software design document (SDD) that includes the system design, programming language, templates, platform to use, and application security measures. This is also where you can flowchart how the software responds to user actions.

In most cases, the design phase will include the development of a prototype model. Creating a pre-production version of the product can give the team the opportunity to visualize what the product will look like and make changes without having to go through the hassle of rewriting code.
4. Development
The actual development phase is where the development team members divide the project into software modules and turn the software requirement into code that makes the product. 

This SDLC phase can take quite a lot of time and specialized development tools. It’s important to have a set timeline and milestones so the software developers understand the expectations and you can keep track of the progress in this stage. 

In some cases, the development stage can also merge with the testing stage where certain tests are run to ensure there are no critical bugs. 

Keep in mind, different types of product development software will have different specialties so you’ll want to pick the one that suits you best.

5. Testing
Before getting the software product out the door to the production environment, it’s important to have your quality assurance team perform validation testing to make sure it is functioning properly and does what it’s meant to do. The testing process can also help hash out any major user experience issues and security issues. 

In some cases, software testing can be done in a simulated environment. Other simpler tests can also be automated. 

The types of testing to do in this phase:

Performance testing: Assesses the software's speed and scalability under different conditions
Functional testing: Verifies that the software meets the requirements
Security testing: Identifies potential vulnerabilities and weaknesses
Unit-testing: Tests individual units or components of the software
Usability testing: Evaluates the software's user interface and overall user experience
Acceptance testing: Also termed end-user testing, beta testing, application testing, or field testing, this is the final testing stage to test if the software product delivers on what it promises
6. Deployment
During the deployment phase, your final product is delivered to your intended user. You can automate this process and schedule your deployment depending on the type. For example, if you are only deploying a feature update, you can do so with a small number of users (canary release). If you are creating brand-new software, you can learn more about the different stages of the software release life cycle (SRLC).  

7. Maintenance
The maintenance phase is the final stage of the SDLC if you’re following the waterfall structure of the software development process. However, the industry is moving towards a more agile software development approach where maintenance is only a stage for further improvement. 

In the maintenance stage, users may find bugs and errors that were missed in the earlier testing phase. These bugs need to be fixed for better user experience and retention. In some cases, these can lead to going back to the first step of the software development life cycle. 

The SDLC phases can also restart for any new features you may want to add in your next release/update.




Compare and contrast the Waterfall and Agile methodologies. Provide examples of scenarios where each would be appropriate.
What is Agile project management?
Agile project management is a dynamic and iterative approach that focuses on continuous improvement,
flexibility, and high levels of team involvement. In this methodology, project plans evolve through the collaborative efforts of cross-functional teams and other stakeholders. The Agile framework is designed to accommodate changes and feedback quickly, 
typically through regular feedback loops that help refine and improve the development process.

What is Waterfall project management?
Waterfall project management is a sequential process where fixed, 
defined requirements are identified early in the project process. 
This methodology involves progressing through a series of distinct phases — concept, 
initiation, analysis, design, construction, testing, implementation,
and maintenance — with each phase completed before the next begins.



Describe the roles and responsibilities of a Software Developer, a Quality Assurance Engineer, and a Project Manager in a software engineering team.

A Software Developer create, develop, and test software elements, either writing the code yourself or preparing the documentation necessary for other programmers to write the code. 
Lead software engineer or technical architect is a senior-level engineering role.

A Quality Assurance Engineer What Software Quality Assurance Engineers and Testers Do. 
Design test plans, scenarios, scripts, or procedures. Document software defects, using a bug tracking system, 
and report defects to software developers. Identify, 
analyze, and document problems with program function, output, online screen, or content.

Software project managers are responsible for planning, scheduling and managing the delivery of software and web projects. 
They're usually qualified in computer science, software engineering or a similar subject and have strong technical knowledge of IT, 
development and computer systems.


Discuss the importance of Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) and Version Control Systems (VCS) in the software development process. Give examples of each.
Most IDEs have built-in support for version control systems. This allows you to perform common operations like committing and branching without leaving your IDE. 
For example, in Visual Studio Code, you can stage changes, commit, create branches, merge branches, 
and even resolve merge conflicts directly in the editor.



What are some common challenges faced by software engineers? Provide strategies to overcome these challenges.
1. Lack of Workflow Visibility
You can’t fully control the external events that impact your software development. But you can be in complete control of the internal factors and prepare your team to be highly resilient and respond to all sorts of challenges. 

A lot of development teams suffer because of a vague understanding of the engineering processes within their organization. Many don’t have clarity about the status of the projects, the activities and challenges of the individuals, and whatnot. 

All these stem from ineffective communication, lack of effective team collaboration, and broken SDLC processes. The domino effect of this is detrimental to your engineering efficiency, and the overall success of the organization. 

Lack of visibility is a critical software engineering challenge. Fail to acknowledge the visibility issue or brush it aside, and in no time your team may get beset by a plethora of business and software engineering challenges that sprout due to lack of visibility:

Misalignment between business goals & tech effort
Technical debt
Delayed projects & increased costs
Inefficient resource allocation & utilization
Software performance challenges
Siloed communication
Unproductive developers and engineering teams
Software security vulnerabilities
Upset stakeholders
How to Combat Lack of Visibility in Development Teams? 
Invest in tools that empower your teams to make data-driven decisions: 

Project management tools
Engineering analytics tools
Observability & monitoring tools
For instance, project managers can estimate timelines that are evidence-based and feasible. Engineering managers can evenly allocate work to software engineers based on individual capacity, workload, and expertise. Thus, saving your champions from the dreaded burnout while optimally utilizing their talent.

On another note, an engineering management platform like Hatica works by integrating with your existing tools stack using Connectors (Git, Jira, Slack, Pagerduty, Circle CI, etc.), pulls data from it, processes it, and serves you with actionable and visual engineering dashboards rich with metrics & insights gained from the mulled data. 

It helps in 360 degree visualization of both your health, and depth of engineering systems, so you can unearth blockers that are currently reducing the effectiveness of your engineering team.

Meanwhile, a metric-driven culture helps senior executives to measure the impact of engineering work, and even help bring alignment to teams crippled with lack of visibility, and communication debt.

We’ve comprehensively covered how cycle time, maker time, deployment velocity, change failure rate, and other key engineering metrics improve engineering visibility, and empower engineering managers to be more effective. 

2. Broken SDLC Processes
Your software development processes can be broken at multiple levels. It could be any of the following-

Poor requirement gathering
Scope creep
Code smells
Improper code reviews
Unhelpful documentation
Inefficient CI/CD pipelines
Inadequate testing or test coverage
Ineffective observability & monitoring
Lack of compliance & regulatory alignment 
Poor crisis response operating procedures, etcetera.
How to Improve Your SDLC Process? 
These are execution challenges that cripple many engineering teams. These software engineering challenges creep in when you do not define processes/procedures. Lack of documentation and training could also be a reason. 

To preserve the integrity of your SDLC process, here are 9 SDLC best practices that your engineering team can follow, and streamline development. From workflow management, to how to scope iterations accurately using data-driven insights, find it all! 

The other type of solution to such engineering challenges is harder, but goes a long way in removing those persistent SDLC blockers by inspecting, detecting, and fixing the root cause. 

For instance, is code reviews a challenge? But why are your code reviews slow? Is it because of a lack of pair programming initiatives, or the reviewer picks up the codebase too late? 

Use an engineering management platform to analyze higher PR reviews, and PR ratio, and identify optimal review workload for your team. The higher the ratio, the better your chance to understand how overburdened your devs are, or if they are compromising on their review time over other non-core tasks. 

We have also put together a list of 11 Engineering KPIs that boost engineering productivity. Download here.

3. Lack of Predictability In Software Delivery 
If you’ve spent enough time in the software industry, you would know that it’s unpredictable. The requirements may change resulting in scope creep and an exponential increase in the project budget, a sudden storm of APIs & third-party library updates can easily morph into dependency hell and bring the entire cadence to a standstill (especially when external libraries get deprecated), bugs can multiply at the rate you see zombies multiply in movies and infest your code to completely mess up the customer experience, and an invisible technical debt until yesterday could be threatening you to blow your digital infrastructure to bits if you ignore it. 

In short, one of the biggest software engineering challenges is that you’re constantly firefighting because you lack predictability. 

How To Improve Accuracy And Predictability In Software Engineering?
Minimize external dependability, especially, avoid getting locked in the cloud.
Switch to DevOps and agile software development methodologies to tackle the challenge of fluid software requirements.
Make your SDLC processes robust with adequate code review, testing, quality & performance analysis.
Infrastructure as Code (IaC) technologies, GitOps, and AIOps to automate infrastructure orchestration and management.
Infrastructure monitoring & observability tools to keep a pulse of the infrastructure health, and proactively respond to infrastructure-related software engineering challenges.
Another good solution for making the software development lifecycle (SDLC) more predictable is to equip your engineering team(s) with engineering analytics tools that improve visibility into the SDLC processes and your overall engineering health. Use a platform that comes with actionable insights to: 

Track software delivery metrics to understand your delivery status, and visualize how each variable can impact your delivery timelines. 
Run data-driven effort estimation for tasks and projects at hand. Connect each IC contribution with the overall development pipeline.  
Improve your planning accuracy by tightening your grip on scope creep, and check whether your engineering team can accommodate any more “new” requests based on effort estimation. 
4. The Problems With Development Velocity 
You need to be continuously shipping new features to the market, either to catch up with the competition or to stay ahead of them. Consumer demands keep evolving. To meet the always-increasing expectations of the consumer, a lot of things should fall in place to have a healthy and sustainable rate of software development. 

The development speed decelerates if your engineering team is affected by developer churn/attrition, inadequate code reviews, unnecessary meetings, dependency hell, infrastructure bottlenecks, scope creep, and more.

How To Speed Up Software Development, and Reduce Time To Market?
Use an engineering management platform to visualize your engineering progress, improve visibility, and make delivery trends and patterns easily identifiable: 

Use cycle time metric to visualize engineering velocity, and understand where your developers are blocked in the pipeline. 
Early detection and fixing of bugs saves time and effort later. Track defect rate by phase (e.g., development, testing, production) to pinpoint areas for improvement.
Frequent, low-risk deployments enable faster feedback and iteration. Streamline deployment processes with deployment frequency. 
5. Scalability, Security, and Performance Challenges
A software application must always be designed for scalability, security, and usability. However, different engineers have different expertise and coding styles. Some don’t comment on their code enough, and some comment excessively. Some adhere to the best coding practices, and some write programs that stink of ‘code smell’. 

In short, code quality may vary a lot if you do not have organization-level benchmarks defined for coding, if your developers have low maker time and active coding days, if your code review processes are flawed, if your software testing process is ineffective, or if the code is not well documented. Poor code quality often leads to scalability, security, or performance-related software engineering challenges.

It’s not the only culprit, inappropriate access management can lead to security vulnerabilities, poor infrastructure configuration can lead to performance and scalability challenges, and so on. It’s not about blaming a particular process, individual, or product. Scalability, security, and performance are more about practices, culture, tools, and their implementation.

How to Improve Software Scalability, Performance, and Security?
Define coding standards to write scalable code
Adopt tools like SonarQube which empowers development teams to perform code quality reviews, and static analysis of the code to detect bugs and code smells.
Implement infrastructure observability and monitoring tools for enhanced performance
Use security testing tools & platforms for enhanced security
Adhere to compliances & regulations for better security
Consider a bug bounty program to detect vulnerabilities early on.
Read more about accelerating velocity and shipping software faster. 

6. Developer Burnout, and a Struggling People Well-Being 
Developer attrition is a major software engineering challenge that many organizations are struggling with today. A high employee turnover rate could force organizations into a state where they are constrained by resource availability. 

In another survey, developers were asked about their burnout state and the reasons behind. The results were staggering. 83% of developers have reported to face burnout, and the reasons they mentioned include: high workload, inefficient processes and poorly defined project goals and targets. Other “hidden” reasons to a deteriorating developer well-being includes: 

Frequent firefighting where they spent too many hours working outside official time, and poor work-life balance 
A bad overall developer experience 
More time is spent in meetings, ad-hoc tasks over coding
Regressive sprint meetings and retro sessions
Lack of data-driven decision making to arrive at conclusions
A friction in people's health, and too many blockers in a developer’s workday results in missed opportunities, and not-so-good customer experiences. 

At the core of all of this could be a sense of not being able to achieve maximum performance with the given resources. 

How To Prevent Burnout, and Take Care Of Your Developer’s Well-Being? 
Tracking, and acting on maker time can help engineering managers to minimize distractions, reduce cognitive clutter, and improve focus time of their direct reports. It is also directly correlated to happy and productive engineers. 
Invest in DevEx (again, Hatica could be your secret tool to win this).
Invest in a culture of learning & reward (off time, recognition, and performance-based increments).
Working towards promoting alignment within and outside teams.
Fostering a culture of developer well-being (and building it into your organization’s DNA).
Deploy DevEx surveys to capture developers feelings, opinions, and comfort with the current engineering paradigm.



Explain the different types of testing (unit, integration, system, and acceptance) and their importance in software quality assurance.
1. Unit/Component Testing
Unit testing is done at the code level, where each component is tested individually to ensure their impartiality and analyze their functionality. Automating unit tests is possible and highly recommended in today’s fast-paced development environment. To make a unit test, you should outline what you expect the code to do and write the code, which will check if it is doing what you expect. You should then run the unit test to verify that everything works as expected. For example, let’s say you have a calculator program that adds two numbers together. You can create a unit test that verifies the numerical values that the calculator program returns are correct. You could also create tests that verify edge cases and errors are handled correctly.

In this simple example, you could use unit testing to verify that the calculator program adds two numbers correctly.

First, outline and document the expectations of the program, such as:

The program should accept two numerical values
It should return the sum of these two values
It should also handle negative numbers correctly
You can then write unit tests that feed these values into the program and verify the correct output. For example, you could have a test that checks the program returns 2 when 1 and 1 are entered. You could have another test that checks the program returns -3 when 1 and -4 are entered. Once all the tests have been written and executed, you can confidently say that the calculator program has been successfully tested and works as expected.

2. Integration Testing
Integration testing enables software testers to test group units integrated into a system or subsystems; it helps identify any bugs or issues arising from coding errors or integrations between modules. It is possible to automate integration testing.

3. System Testing
System testing is performed on an integrated environment comprising the whole application, where all components are assessed against specific business requirements. You can use automation tools for System Testing.

For example, Testsigma, a no-code test automation platform, can complete end-to-end flows for web, mobile, and desktop applications and APIs.

4. Acceptance Testing
Acceptance testing involves testing the system’s Functional and Non-functional aspects, such as performance, security, usability, accessibility, compatibility, and reliability. Depending on the system’s complexity, it can be done manually or through automation tools. In this example, we will demonstrate the process of using Testsigma to automate the acceptance testing of a login page. First, we must create a test scenario that simulates users entering their login credentials and logging in successfully. Testsigma will automatically detect any issues with the page and report them back to us. Using Testsigma for acceptance testing, we can ensure that our login page is working as expected and ready for deployment.

Start using Testsigma to automate your system, integration and acceptance tests

Software Testing Sequence
Let’s talk about test sequences. It’s a fancy way of saying we need to test our software step by step. We must go through four main testing stages before we can say our software is ready.

First up, we’ve got unit testing. This is where we test each unit or component of the software to ensure it’s doing what it’s supposed to.
Then we move on to integration testing, where we test how all the different units work together.
Next, we’ve got system testing, where we test the whole system as a complete package.
Finally, we’ve got acceptance testing, where we let the end users have a go at the software to ensure it’s meeting their needs.
And that’s it! Four simple steps to make sure our software is top-notch.

software testing steps

Conclusion
Software Testing is a necessary process. It guarantees the software does what it should and meets all the requirements. Skipping testing can lead to severe issues that can mess up the software’s usefulness and how it works. So, don’t forget to give enough time and resources to test your software if you want it to be a hit when you launch it.

#Part 2: Introduction to AI and Prompt Engineering


Define prompt engineering and discuss its importance in interacting with AI models.
Prompt engineering makes it easy for users to obtain relevant results in the first prompt. 
It helps mitigate bias that may be present from existing human bias in the large language models' training data. Further, 
it enhances the user-AI interaction so the AI understands the user's intention even with minimal input.

Provide an example of a vague prompt and then improve it by making it clear, specific, and concise. 
Explain why the improved prompt is more effective.
